[export] torch.export landing page (#108783)
pytorch/pytorch: docs/source/export.rst

.. _torch.export:

torch.export
=====================

.. warning::

>     This feature is a prototype under active development and there WILL BE breaking changes in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This feature is a prototype under active development and there WILL BE BREAKING CHANGES in the future.
```

Overview
--------

> ``torch.export`` is a one-shot process for a sound, full-program capture of a
> PyTorch model into a standardized representation ahead-of-time (AOT). It is
> designed to streamline and standardize the way PyTorch interacts with various
> systems and platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :func:`export` takes an arbitrary Python callable (an nn.Module, a function or
    a method) and produces a traced graph representing only the Tensor
    computation of the function in an Ahead-of-Time (AOT) fashion, which can
    subsequently be executed with different outputs or serialized.  
```

* **TorchDynamo (torch._dynamo)** is an internal API that uses a CPython feature
  called the Frame Evaluation API to safely trace PyTorch graphs. This
  provides a massively improved graph capturing experience, with much fewer
  rewrites needed in order to fully trace the PyTorch code.

* **AOT Autograd** provides a functionalized PyTorch graph and ensures the graph
  is decomposed/lowered to the small defined Core ATen operator set.

* **Torch FX (torch.fx)** is the underlying representation of the graph,
  allowing flexible Python-based transformations.

Existing frameworks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:func:`torch.compile` also utilizes the same PT2 stack as ``torch.export``, but
is slightly different in that it is a JIT compiler. When :func:`torch.compile`
runs into an untraceable part of a model, it will "graph break" and fall back to
running the program in the eager Python runtime. In comparison, ``torch.export``
aims to get a full graph representation of a PyTorch model, so it will error out
when something untraceable is reached. Since ``torch.export`` produces a full
graph disjoint from any Python features or runtime, this graph can then be

> saved, loaded, and run in different environments and languages.

Reviewer: Can we add a bullet point list in this paragraph highlighting the differences:

1) JIT vs AoT: torch.compile is not intended to be used to produce compiled artifact outside of deployment
2) partial vs full graph
3) Usability tradeoff (requires code rewriting vs not)

Compared to :func:`torch.fx.symbolic_trace`, ``torch.export`` traces using
TorchDynamo which operates at the Python bytecode level, giving it the ability
to trace arbitrary Python constructs not limited by what Python operator
overloading supports. Additionally, ``torch.export`` keeps fine-grained track of
tensor metadata, so that conditionals on things like tensor shapes do not
fail tracing. In general, ``torch.export`` is expected to work on more user

> programs, but produce lower-level graphs (at the ``torch.ops.aten`` operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
programs, and produce lower-level graphs (at the ``torch.ops.aten`` operator
```

                # code: a.add_(constant)
                add: f32[1, 16, 256, 256] = torch.ops.aten.add.Tensor(convolution, arg3_1);

                # code: return self.maxpool(self.relu(a))
                relu: f32[1, 16, 256, 256] = torch.ops.aten.relu.default(add);
                max_pool2d_with_indices = torch.ops.aten.max_pool2d_with_indices.default(relu, [3, 3], [3, 3]);
                getitem: f32[1, 16, 85, 85] = max_pool2d_with_indices[0];
                return (getitem,)

    Graph signature: ExportGraphSignature(parameters=['L__self___conv.weight', 'L__self___conv.bias'], buffers=[], user_inputs=['arg2_1', 'arg3_1'], user_outputs=['getitem'], inputs_to_parameters={'arg0_1': 'L__self___conv.weight', 'arg1_1': 'L__self___conv.bias'}, inputs_to_buffers={}, buffers_to_mutate={}, backward_signature=None, assertion_dep_token=None)
    Range constraints: {}
    Equality constraints: []
    """

Inspecting the ``ExportedProgram``, we can note the following:

* The :class:`torch.fx.Graph` contains the computation graph of the original
  program, along with records of the original code for easy debugging.

> * The graph contains only ``torch.ops.aten`` operators found in the

Reviewer: And custom ops

  :ref:`Core ATen IR <torch.compiler_ir>` opset, and is fully functional,
  without any inplace operators such as ``torch.add_``.

> * The parameters (weight and bias to conv) are lifted as inputs to the graph,

Reviewer: Should we pick an example with buffer as well?

  resulting in no ``get_attr`` nodes in the graph, which previously existed in
  the result of :func:`torch.fx.symbolic_trace`.

* The :class:`torch.export.ExportGraphSignature` models the input and output
  signature, along with specifying which inputs are parameters.

* The resulting shape and dtype of tensors produced by each node in the graph is
  noted. For example, the ``convolution`` node will result in a tensor of dtype
  ``torch.float32`` and shape (1, 16, 256, 256).

Expressing Dynamism
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default ``torch.export`` will trace the program assuming all input shapes are
**static**, and specializing the exported program to those dimensions. However,

> some dimensions, such as a batch dimension, are not expected to not be the same
> all the time. Such dimensions must be marked dynamic using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some dimensions, such as a batch dimension can be dynamic and vary from run to run. Such dimensions must be marked dynamic using the
```

  the range [2, inf]. For technical reasons that are difficult to explain here,
  they are assumed to be not 0 or 1. This is not a bug, and does not necessarily
  mean that the exported program will not work for dimensions 0 or 1. See
  `The 0/1 Specialization Problem <https://docs.google.com/document/d/16VPOa3d-Liikf48teAOmxLc92rgvJdfosIy-yoT38Io/edit?fbclid=IwAR3HNwmmexcitV0pbZm_x1a4ykdXZ9th_eJWK-3hBtVgKnrkmemz6Pm5jRQ#heading=h.ez923tomjvyk>`_
  for an in-depth discussion of this topic.

* ``exported_program.equality_constraints`` describes which dimensions are
  required to be equal. Since we specified in the constraints that the first
  dimension of each argument is equivalent,
  (``dynamic_dim(example_args[0], 0) == dynamic_dim(example_args[1], 0)``),
  we see in the equality constraints the tuple specifying that ``arg4_1``
  dimension 0 and ``arg5_1`` dimension 0 are equal.

Serialization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To save the ``ExportedProgram``, users can use the :func:`torch.export.save` and
:func:`torch.export.load` APIs. It will serialize the ``ExportedProgram`` to a
Python dataclass, and then save it as a JSON format. The ``state_dict`` will be

> saved to a file separate from the serialized ``ExportedProgram``.

Reviewer: Maybe we shouldn't expose the internal details of the file format in case (and quite likely) we change it in the future.

A convention is to save the ``ExportedProgram`` using a ``.pt2`` file extension.

An example:

::

    import torch
    import io

    class MyModule(torch.nn.Module):
        def forward(self, x):
            return x + 10

    exported_program = torch.export.export(MyModule(), torch.randn(5))

    torch.export.save(exported_program, 'exported_program.pt2')

>     saved_exported_program = torch.export.save('exported_program.pt2')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    saved_exported_program = torch.export.load('exported_program.pt2')
```

            return x + 1
        else:
            return x - 1

    example_inputs = (torch.rand(10, 2),)
    exported_program = export(fn, example_inputs)
    print(exported_program)
    """
    ExportedProgram:
        class GraphModule(torch.nn.Module):
            def forward(self, arg0_1: f32[10, 2]):
                add: f32[10, 2] = torch.ops.aten.add.Tensor(arg0_1, 1);
                return (add,)
    """

The conditional of (``x.shape[0] > 5``) does not appear in the
``ExportedProgram`` because the example inputs have the static
shape of (10, 2). Since ``torch.export`` specializes on the inputs' static
shapes, the else branch (``x - 1``) will never be reached. To preserve the dynamic
branching behavior based on the shape of a tensor in the traced graph,
:func:`torch.export.dynamic_dim` will need to be used to specify the dimension
of the input tensor (``x.shape[0]``) to be dynamic, and the source code will
need to be :ref:`rewritten <Data/Shape-Dependent Control Flow>`.

Non-tensor inputs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``torch.export`` also specializes the traced graph based on the values of inputs
that are not ``torch.Tensor``, such as ``int``, ``float``, ``bool``, and ``str``.

> For example:

Reviewer: Maybe add a note saying that we will likely change this in the near future to not specialize on values of primitive type inputs.

TorchDynamo which operates at the Python bytecode level, giving it the ability
to trace arbitrary Python constructs not limited by what Python operator
overloading supports. Additionally, ``torch.export`` keeps fine-grained track of
tensor metadata, so that conditionals on things like tensor shapes do not
fail tracing. In general, ``torch.export`` is expected to work on more user
programs, and produce lower-level graphs (at the ``torch.ops.aten`` operator
level). Note that users can still use :func:`torch.fx.symbolic_trace` as a
preprocessing step before ``torch.export``.

Compared to :func:`torch.jit.script`, ``torch.export`` does not capture Python
control flow or data structures, but it supports more Python language features
than TorchScript (as it is easier to have comprehensive coverage over Python
bytecodes). The resulting graphs are simpler and only have straight line control
flow (except for explicit control flow operators).

Compared to :func:`torch.jit.trace`, ``torch.export`` is sound: it is able to
trace code that performs integer computation on sizes and records all of the
side-conditions necessary to show that a particular trace is valid for other
inputs.

> 

Reviewer: What do you think about move this to somewhere later so that we start with a one-sentence overview and then immediately go into an example?

Author: Hmm, if we do that then I'm not sure how to organize the document. 

Should we put both examples (w/o dynamic shape and w/ dynamic shape)?
Where should we include the stuff about specialization? 
Where should the graph invariants be explained then? Right after the example?

Reviewer: I mean we start with the most basic example so that users get some intuition of what it does, then we go through detailed explanation and other examples. What do you think?

Author: Ok, I added the example and it looks fine. What do you think?

Reviewer: Thanks! I mean can we have the most *basic* example, without additional concepts constraints/dynamic dims. Those concepts can be introduced in later sections.

A few other nits about examples:
1) What do you think about splitting export results (the printed exported program part) into a separate code block so that it is clear that is the output
2) Maybe we can manually format the GraphSignature print a bit so that each field is on a new line so that it is easier to read?

Author: updated!

  :ref:`Core ATen IR <torch.compiler_ir>` opset.

* **Graph properties**: The graph is purely functional, meaning it has no side
  effects.

*  **Metadata**: The graph contains metadata captured during tracing, such as a
   stacktrace from user's code.

Under the hood, ``torch.export`` leverages the following latest technologies:

* **TorchDynamo (torch._dynamo)** is an internal API that uses a CPython feature
  called the Frame Evaluation API to safely trace PyTorch graphs. This
  provides a massively improved graph capturing experience, with much fewer
  rewrites needed in order to fully trace the PyTorch code.

* **AOT Autograd** provides a functionalized PyTorch graph and ensures the graph
  is lowered to the small defined Core ATen operator set.

* **Torch FX (torch.fx)** is the underlying representation of the graph,
  allowing flexible Python-based transformations.

Exporting a PyTorch Model
-------------------------

The main entrypoint is through :func:`torch.export.export`, which takes a
callable (:class:`torch.nn.Module`, function, or method) and captures the
computation graph into an :class:`torch.export.ExportedProgram`. An example:

> ::

Reviewer 2: something like .. code-block:: python might be better?

Author: I think it auto-formats to python? 🤔 I copied from torch.fx's rst haha 😂

  shape appearing in the graph. In this case, we see that ``s0`` and ``s1`` have
  the range [2, inf]. For technical reasons that are difficult to explain here,
  they are assumed to be not 0 or 1. This is not a bug, and does not necessarily
  mean that the exported program will not work for dimensions 0 or 1. See
  `The 0/1 Specialization Problem <https://docs.google.com/document/d/16VPOa3d-Liikf48teAOmxLc92rgvJdfosIy-yoT38Io/edit?fbclid=IwAR3HNwmmexcitV0pbZm_x1a4ykdXZ9th_eJWK-3hBtVgKnrkmemz6Pm5jRQ#heading=h.ez923tomjvyk>`_
  for an in-depth discussion of this topic.

* ``exported_program.equality_constraints`` describes which dimensions are
  equivalent. Since we specified in the constraints that the first dimension of
  each argument is equivalent,
  (``dynamic_dim(example_args[0], 0) == dynamic_dim(example_args[1], 0)``),
  we see in the equality constraints the tuple specifying that ``arg4_1``
  dimension 0 and ``arg5_1`` dimension 0 are equal.

Limitations of torch.export
---------------------------

Graph Breaks
^^^^^^^^^^^^

As ``torch.export`` is a one-shot process for capturing a computation graph from

> a PyTorch program, it will ultimately run into untraceable parts of programs as

Reviewer 3: "it will" -> "it might"

it is nearly impossible to support tracing all PyTorch and Python features. In

> the case of ``torch.compile``, untraceable parts of programs will "graph break"

Reviewer 3: In the case of `torch.compile`, *an unsupported operation will cause a "graph break" and the unsupported operation will be run with default Python evaluation. In contrast,* `torch.export` will require...

and run the unsupported operation with default Python evaluation. However,
``torch.export`` will require users to provide additional information or rewrite

> parts of their code to make it traceable. As the foundation of the tracing is

Reviewer 3: either: *As the foundation of the tracing is TorchDynamo* 
or: *As the tracing is based on TorchDynamo*

based on TorchDynamo, which evaluates at the Python bytecode level, there
will be significantly fewer rewrites required compared to previous tracing
frameworks.

When a graph break is encountered, :ref:`ExportDB <torch.export_db>` is a great

> source of supported and unsupported programs, along with ways to rewrite

Reviewer 3: "source of supported and unsupported programs" -> "resource for learning about the kinds of programs that are supported and unsupported"

programs to make them traceable.

Control Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Graph breaks can also be encountered on general control flow
(ex. ``if x[0] > 4``), which a tracing compiler cannot possibly deal with
without generating code for a combinatorially exploding number of paths. In such
cases, users will need to rewrite their code using special
**Control Flow Operators**.

Data-Dependent Accesses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Data dependent behavior such as using the value inside of a tensor to construct
another tensor, or using the value of a tensor to slice into another tensor, is
also something the tracer cannot fully determine. Users will need to rewrite
their code using the inline constraint APIs

> :func:`torch.export.constrain_as_size` and

Reviewer 3: Eh, we really should move these out of export. Just call the underlying ops directly (easy to change because there are no current users).

:func:`torch.export.constrain_as_value`.

Missing Meta Kernels for Operators
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When tracing, a META implementation (or "meta kernel") is required for all
operators. This is used to reason about the input/output shapes for this
operator.

> Note that the official API for registering custom meta kernels is currently

Reviewer 3: Still undergoing development? :(
We need to add this to our MUST HAVE list.

Reviewer 4: If you folks have bandwidth, there's a lot to do in custom ops space: https://fb.workplace.com/notes/1307774206611208/

.. _torch.export:

torch.export
=====================

.. warning::
    This feature is a prototype and may have compatibility breaking changes in the future.

Overview
--------

``torch.export`` is an ahead-of-time (AOT) process built to fully convert
define-by-run PyTorch code into a static and standardized model representation,
with strong soundness guarantees. It is designed to streamline and standardize the

> way PyTorch interacts with various systems and platforms.

Reviewer 4: The words are kind of big - "why is export a 'process'"? "what does define-by-run mean?" (I'm still not sure after all these years).

A more down to earth explanation could be something like "torch.export is a collection of APIs for sound full program capture of a PyTorch model into a standardized representation"

``torch.export`` creates a full graph representation of a PyTorch model
that can be saved and loaded and run in different environments and

> languages. In comparison, ``torch.compile`` is a JIT compiler which provides

Reviewer 4: can link to torch.compile docs with :func:

> the flexibility of creating partial graphs, where untraceable parts of models

Reviewer 5: Might be worth elaborating more on why an end user might want to use `torch.compile(m, fullgraph=True)` vs `torch.export()` 

Something along the lines of if you need your model to run in environments where python is not available you're going to have to remove graph breaks

result in a "graph break" and will be defaulted back to the eager Python runtime.

``torch.export`` maintains a clean intermediate representation (IR) with the
following invariants. More specifications about the IR can be found here (coming
soon!).

* **Normalized**: There are no Python semantics within the graph

* **Defined Operator Set**: The graph produced contains a small defined
  :ref:`Core ATen IR <torch.compiler_ir>` opset.

* **Graph properties**: The graph is purely functional, meaning it has no side

>   effects.

Reviewer 4: "functional" means it has no side effects, but does it also mean "no view operations" as well?

*  **Metadata**: The graph contains metadata captured during tracing, such as a
   stacktrace from user's code.

Under the hood, ``torch.export`` leverages the following latest technologies:

> * **TorchDynamo (torch._dynamo)** is an internal API that uses a CPython feature

Author: I linked it in the "Read More" section

  called the Frame Evaluation API to safely trace PyTorch graphs. This
  provides a massively improved graph capturing experience, with much fewer
  rewrites needed in order to fully trace the PyTorch code.

* **AOT Autograd** provides a functionalized PyTorch graph and ensures the graph
  is lowered to the small defined Core ATen operator set.

* **Torch FX (torch.fx)** is the underlying representation of the graph,
  allowing flexible Python-based transformations.

> Exporting a PyTorch Model

Reviewer 5: If this doc is meant for end users of torch.export its important to also mention serialization here and how to run the exported graph

-------------------------

The main entrypoint is through :func:`torch.export.export`, which takes a
callable (:class:`torch.nn.Module`, function, or method) and captures the

> computation graph into an :class:`torch.export.ExportedProgram`. An example:

Reviewer 4: It takes a callable and sample inputs, right? The sample inputs are important because the graph is specialized on them, as you mention below

                convolution: f32[1, 16, 256, 256] = torch.ops.aten.convolution.default(arg2_1, arg0_1, arg1_1, [1, 1], [1, 1], [1, 1], False, [0, 0], 1);  arg2_1 = arg0_1 = arg1_1 = None

                # code: a.add_(constant)
                add: f32[1, 16, 256, 256] = torch.ops.aten.add.Tensor(convolution, arg3_1);  convolution = arg3_1 = None

                # code: return self.maxpool(self.relu(a))
                relu: f32[1, 16, 256, 256] = torch.ops.aten.relu.default(add);  add = None
                max_pool2d_with_indices = torch.ops.aten.max_pool2d_with_indices.default(relu, [3, 3], [3, 3]);  relu = None
                getitem: f32[1, 16, 85, 85] = max_pool2d_with_indices[0];  max_pool2d_with_indices = None
                return (getitem,)

    Graph signature: ExportGraphSignature(parameters=['L__self___conv.weight', 'L__self___conv.bias'], buffers=[], user_inputs=['arg2_1', 'arg3_1'], user_outputs=['getitem'], inputs_to_parameters={'arg0_1': 'L__self___conv.weight', 'arg1_1': 'L__self___conv.bias'}, inputs_to_buffers={}, buffers_to_mutate={}, backward_signature=None, assertion_dep_token=None)
    Range constraints: {}
    Equality constraints: []
    """

> Inspecting the ``ExportedProgram``, we can note the following:

Author: I don't really like how the `torch.export.ExportedProgram` looks 😅

                permute_1: f32[128, 64] = torch.ops.aten.permute.default(arg2_1, [1, 0]);  arg2_1 = None
                addmm_1: f32[s1, 64] = torch.ops.aten.addmm.default(arg3_1, arg5_1, permute_1);  arg3_1 = arg5_1 = permute_1 = None
                relu_1: f32[s1, 64] = torch.ops.aten.relu.default(addmm_1);  addmm_1 = None
                return (relu, relu_1)

    Graph signature: ExportGraphSignature(parameters=['L__self___branch1_0.weight', 'L__self___branch1_0.bias', 'L__self___branch2_0.weight', 'L__self___branch2_0.bias'], buffers=[], user_inputs=['arg4_1', 'arg5_1'], user_outputs=['relu', 'relu_1'], inputs_to_parameters={'arg0_1': 'L__self___branch1_0.weight', 'arg1_1': 'L__self___branch1_0.bias', 'arg2_1': 'L__self___branch2_0.weight', 'arg3_1': 'L__self___branch2_0.bias'}, inputs_to_buffers={}, buffers_to_mutate={}, backward_signature=None, assertion_dep_token=None)
    Range constraints: {s0: RangeConstraint(min_val=2, max_val=9223372036854775806), s1: RangeConstraint(min_val=2, max_val=9223372036854775806)}
    Equality constraints: [(InputDim(input_name='arg4_1', dim=0), InputDim(input_name='arg5_1', dim=0))]
    """

Some additional things to note:

> * Through the :func:``torch.export.dynamic_dim`` API, we specified the first

Reviewer 4: Not rendering correctly
<img width="395" alt="image" src="https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/assets/5652049/cbb41d1f-aca1-4a70-b49c-92a343cee396">

  dimension 0 and ``arg5_1`` dimension 0 are equal.

Limitations of torch.export
---------------------------

Graph Breaks
^^^^^^^^^^^^

As ``torch.export`` is a one-shot process for capturing a computation graph from
a PyTorch program, it might ultimately run into untraceable parts of programs as
it is nearly impossible to support tracing all PyTorch and Python features. In
the case of ``torch.compile``, an unsupported operation will cause a "graph
break" and the unsupported operation will be run with default Python evaluation.
In contrast, ``torch.export`` will require users to provide additional
information or rewrite parts of their code to make it traceable. As the
tracing is based on TorchDynamo, which evaluates at the Python
bytecode level, there will be significantly fewer rewrites required compared to
previous tracing frameworks.

When a graph break is encountered, :ref:`ExportDB <torch.export_db>` is a great
resource for learning about the kinds of programs that are supported and
unsupported, along with ways to rewrite programs to make them traceable.

Control Flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Graph breaks can also be encountered on general control flow

> (ex. ``if x[0] > 4``), which a tracing compiler cannot possibly deal with

Reviewer 4: Might be easier to frame this as "data-dependent" or "dynamic-shape dependent" control flow. We support most control flow, just not the data-dependent ones.

Examples are probably a good idea (or could be left for a future control flow section) -- it is not clear to the user what control flow is permissive

without generating code for a combinatorially exploding number of paths. In such
cases, users will need to rewrite their code using special

> **Control Flow Operators**.

Author: I think it would still be good to mention them, but I won't add any examples and I'll add a "coming soon!" message. Similarly, the constrain APIs are not exactly finalized right? Because we don't want to keep them in export?

> **Control Flow Operators**.

Reviewer: Good idea, just mention that we intend to support it and it would be available soon.

Data-Dependent Accesses
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Data dependent behavior such as using the value inside of a tensor to construct
another tensor, or using the value of a tensor to slice into another tensor, is
also something the tracer cannot fully determine. Users will need to rewrite
their code using the inline constraint APIs
:func:`torch.export.constrain_as_size` and
:func:`torch.export.constrain_as_value`.

Missing Meta Kernels for Operators
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When tracing, a META implementation (or "meta kernel") is required for all

Reviewer 5: depending on who the audience is for this, it's helpful to separate out content for export devs vs end users
